Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricard Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Kaylyn o'connor. She is
professor in the Department of Logic and Philosophy of
Science at the University of California Herrin. She is
a philosopher of biology and be sciences, philosopher of
science and evolutionary game theorist. She is the author
of books like the Origins of Unfairness Games in
the Philosophy of Biology and the misinformation Age. And
today we're going to talk about some of her
uh topics. So some of the subjects she focus
on. So Doctor o'conner, welcome to the show. It's
a big pleasure to everyone.
Oh, thanks for having me, Ricardo.
So let me start by asking you since you
apply a game theory in your work or at
least to some of your work. So what is
it basically? And to what kinds of topics do
you apply it? Uh Mostly.
Yeah. So game theory, it's um it's a branch
of math that is used to study strategic human
interactions. And so a strategic interaction. Is it anything
where you have two individuals who are interacting and
where they both care about what the other one
does. So I have some stake in the game
and what you're doing and the reverse is true.
Um Game theory when it was first developed was
applied just to humans. And usually the idea was
we'll analyze people as if they're fully rational and
then use that to predict what they might do
or explain what we see people doing. So assume
that I think really hard about what you're gonna
do and then make my best choice for an
action based on what you're gonna do and what
I want to happen. Um Later on, it was
introduced to biology as well to apply to different
kinds of critters, you know, to animals, even things
like micro organisms sometimes, and some of the assumptions
were changed to think less about like rationality and
more about how um how animals might learn to
behave strategically or they might evolve to behave strategically.
So a lot of the work I do uses
those latter kinds of models or tools and I've
applied game theoretic models to all sorts of systems.
So I've used them to think about signaling in
biology and in humans. So things like human language
and how animals communicate with each other. I've used
them to think about like perception in the brain.
I've used them to think about things related to
unfairness, which is related to that book. You mentioned
like how to unfair norms emerge in human societies.
Um I've used them to think about the evolution
of moral emotions, like guilt and shame. Uh, AND
also to some degree to think about stuff like
misinformation and the spread of knowledge and belief in
humans.
Mhm. Yeah. And we'll get into some of those
topics, uh, later in our conversation. But I would
like to ask you now about science, the institution
of science and scientists themselves because there's, that's also
a topic that you study. So are scientists themselves
subject to social pressures?
Uh Yeah. OK. We're like jumping to different stuff.
So, yes, they are. This isn't um an observation
that's like new to me by any means. It's
something that people have been noticing and talking about
for decades and decades in thinking about how science
works. Uh So scientists of course, are humans, they
like other humans care about what other people think
they grew up in human societies. They have human
biases, human social tendencies. And there's a lot of
really compelling evidence showing that all of that influences
how science as an enterprise gets done.
Uh And I mean, one of the things that
uh we as humans are, at least to some
extent is we are conformist. So is conformity, something
that also happens in science and if so, is
it good or bad?
Yeah. So this is something that I've worked on
with um a collaborator of mine, Jim Weall. So
the idea of conformity of some sort mattering to
science goes back a pretty long way. So for
example, Thomas Coon, in this very famous book, The
Structure of Scientific Revolutions has this idea that, you
know, scientists tend to work within a paradigm and
they'll all be kind of attached to this para
this way of thinking about the world and there
will be social pressure sort of keeping people within
the paradigm and supporting it. And I think there's
some idea there about people conforming with each other.
And then he has this idea that like you
get younger people who are less part of this
community coming up and challenging the old notions in
our work. What um Jim and I did was
thought about groups of learners who are getting evidence
from the world. So we built these models of
individuals who can gather evidence and share evidence. And
we asked, would they get better or worse at
learning if we made them want to conform? And
the way we included conformity in the model is
we assumed all the agents are in a network.
So this is something that represents their social connections.
Each node in the network is an individual and
then each link between them is like a social
tie. And so our agents um in deciding what
evidence to gather and what actions to take, they
would both take evidence that they had gathered or
seen in the past, but they would also think
about what their neighbors were doing. So, for example,
if I had a lot of evidence that say
the COVID vaccine is relatively low risk, but I
had a lot of neighbors who were not getting
vaccinated. In this model, I might choose not to
get vaccinated because I prefer to conform with neighbors.
And then we ask, how does that impact learning
and decision making in the group? And then these
models, we found that on average conformity would tend
to make the group worse at learning and individuals
more likely to take bad actions. And there were
a couple of reasons for that. So one thing
is that conformity would stop individuals from sharing good
evidence. So say, I think personally that vaccines are
safe and I have good evidence that that's the
case. But I'm with a bunch of people who
aren't getting vaccinated if I conform to them, I
never tell them about my good evidence. I never
get vaccinated and let them see what happens. So
you create these kind of information bottlenecks where good
information isn't flowing in the network,
but the science or uh the science tend to
be a conservative enterprise. And if so, what does
that mean exactly within the domain of science to
be conservative?
Yeah, that's a really um a big question and
I think a really hard one to answer. So
some people in philosophy of science worry about conservatism
in science and when they talk about that. So
this isn't, this is something I've written a little
bit on, but it's not like a central topic
for me. So just keep that in mind when
they talk about that. Um Usually what they mean
is something like there are forces or structures in
science that keep scientists working on the same kinds
of problems or keep them from, for example, looking
at questions that are too weird or too outside
the norm or that are, for example, high risk,
high reward or that are sometimes people call it
mavericky or um just more unusual. And so a
lot of people argue that there are forces that
kind of keep scientists from doing stuff that's too
different or too unusual. And sometimes people argue that
that's a bad thing that um what you want
across a community of science is to have at
least a good handful of people working on topics
that maybe don't seem right or hypotheses that people
don't currently believe or things that seem risky or
strange. And if you have that handful of people,
maybe most of them fail, but some of them
do succeed. And in doing so might discover things
that are really unusual or sort of revolutionize a
science. So that's why a lot of people are
like, conservatism could be bad in science. Um The
different arguments I've heard about like why you see
conservatism in science are things like uh well, increasingly
the age of scientific investigators is going up, increasingly
it takes longer and longer to get to the
position where you're the head of a lab and
you might just be indoctrinated for a very long
time within a field before you're the one picking
the research choices. Um People argue that uh grant
giving agencies are inherently conservative because they're trying to
get these good outcomes. And so they tend to
give money to, to projects that look more safe,
more dependable, more reliable. Um Some agencies have set
up these sort of high risk, high reward special
grants to try to push against that. I wrote
this one paper that modeled scientific communities and asked,
OK, what would be the conditions under which we'd
expect conservative science to spread as people train their
students and then those students get jobs. And the
argument I made in that paper is that while
conservative science tends to be more like less risky,
you know, that you're gonna be able to get
some discovery and publish it compared to something that's
more high risk where maybe you're gonna get a
huge payoff, but maybe it's just not gonna turn
out to be anything interesting at all. Um And
so in my models, I made that assumption and
I found that often, in fact, high risk science
would be likely to spread because the people doing
it are getting these really high payoffs. They become,
who succeed, are getting these really high payoffs, they
become famous, their students can get jobs. But the
problem with that is that it's often hard to
repeat. So on the assumption that if I'm a
sort of risk taking scientist and I happen to
be successful, my students, if they try to take
risks, may or may not be, I find that
in those cases, conservatism can kind of dominate in
science.
And I imagine that in this case, it's high
risk because it might imply several different sorts of
potential damage, like reputation damage and in the extreme,
perhaps losing one's own uh career and academic credibility.
I guess
there can be those kinds of risks and there
can also just be the risk that you spend
a lot of time and effort on some project
and then you just don't get anything out at
the end. So for example, if you think about
someone who's trying to get tenure in an academic
system, they have to publish before the tenure clock
runs out. So if you take on a project
that like maybe it's gonna turn out great, but
there's a pretty good chance the whole project is
gonna fail, you can see why that might be
a bad choice for that individual.
But these are not easy problem. Uh These, these
problems are not easy to navigate, right? Because on
the one hand, it's understandable that uh looking at
the whole system, uh many times it's not worth
it to waste resources on research or ideas that
won't produce anything. Of course, I, I imagine that
it's hard before and to really know for sure
what would be wasteful or not. Uh, BUT on
the other hand, uh, we also very much need,
at least sometimes, uh, people who think a little
bit more outside of the box to push the
fields forward.
Right. Yeah, that's right. And I think, you know,
say you're the National Science Foundation in the US
or say you're, um, an eu grant giving body,
you're giving these grants, you are paid by tax
dollars and run through a government. And so you
need to justify to the people of, you know,
your country or your institution, why you're giving the
grants you're giving and what they're for. And sometimes
I think it can be really hard to say
like there was a good reason why we gave
a grant to this person who's doing this thing
that sounds kind of wacky or out there. Um
And so that I think there are like these
very practical reasons why you wouldn't necessarily want to
support higher risk science, even if you can make
the argument like, ok, but across a whole body
of scientists, we want to have at least some
people doing this higher risk stuff. Uh One of
my colleagues, Kyle Stanford has argued that um you
know, changes in funding, like have promoted conservatism in
part because when you had a good number of
like independently wealthy scientists, they could just do whatever
they wanted, right? Like they, you know, they didn't
have to answer to anybody if they think, like,
well, tomorrow I'm gonna go look at all the
earthworms all over England. Like Charles Darwin did. Who's
gonna say no? Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. That, that was exactly one of the things
that was coming to my mind while you were
speaking because, uh, I mean, of course, historically, we
know that most of the people who made a
scientific progress were usually very, very wealthy people, or
at least people with, with good enough, uh, monetary
resources and other kinds of resources to devote their
time and they didn't have to answer to anybody
but mo for the most part, uh, and they
could dedicate as much time as they wanted and
as long as they wanted to study any kind
of subject like Charles Darwin in the, in the
19th century. And I guess that also to some
extent, Einstein in the 20th century. But, uh, I
mean, um, uh, uh, those were on the one
hand, lucky people and on the other hand, uh,
privileged people. And on the other hand, I mean,
if we are to really push science forward more
rapidly and involving more people, which I imagine it's
better than just rely on perhaps a handful of
lucky geniuses or something like that, uh, I, I
mean, it, it's not really feasible to wait for
that kind of thing to happen.
Right. No, I think, you know, another point which
a lot of people have made and seems right?
Also is that when we're thinking about this desire
to have science as a group working on many,
many different types of topics, um like another way
that you get that is by drawing on different
kinds of people with different backgrounds and concerns. So
in some way, like being, you know, whatever a
wealthy gentleman means, you have all the freedom to
work on whatever wacky thing you want. But it
was also the case that historically in science, especially
if we're looking at like Western science since the
scientific revolution. Well, it's like a lot of wealthy,
independent white European and men, right? And so there's
not as much diversity as a perspective as you
would see in a lot of scientific communities now.
And so people also think, well, that kind of
diversity of perspective is another source for new ideas,
different ideas, ideas that will push science forward.
Yeah. Also because uh I don't know if this
is something that you look into specifically. But over
the years I've been talking on the show with
um for example, cultural psychologists and cognitive scientists and
uh even people that come from different cultural backgrounds
tend to think about things in different ways. And
it's very much valuable to science to have people
with different cultural backgrounds and coming to the table
with different uh cognitions, I guess.
Yeah. And I think there's a lot of examples
from the history of science that demonstrate how that
can can be beneficial.
Uh So since we're talking about science, from the
perspective of uh game theory or trying to understand
science through game theory or more specifically evolutionary game
theory, uh is the scientific community also a population
that undergoes selection,
I think it can be thought of that way.
So there's been this kind of handful of people
using evolutionary models to think about scientific communities. So
the idea of thinking about science as an evolutionary
system goes back like much further. So for example,
David Hall wrote this very influential book where he
was thinking about the evolution of science, but he
was thinking of the units more or as ideas
where the ideas themselves are being selected and changed.
Whereas recently, a bunch of people have been writing
papers where the units are scientists and you can
ask questions like who remains within a scientific community
and why um given that scientists are using different
sorts of approaches, what approaches will tend to stay
in the community, what approaches will tend to spread,
uh which ones will be more prominent and so
will be copied more. And you know, this isn't,
it's not like um this is entirely novel, you
know, there's this whole field of cultural evolutionary theory
which thinks about how do we take evolutionary theory
and apply it to human practices and norms and
actions and beliefs and systems. And so you can
do the same thing within science. It, it, time
I think pretty successfully.
Mhm. Bicultural evolutionary theory, you mean, uh, the work,
uh, been being done by people like Robert Boyd,
Peter Richardson, Joe Eric and perhaps, uh, more on
the side of the Parisian school than Spur, I
mean, people like that.
Yeah, those are a bunch of the, like, most
prominent people doing cultural evolutionary theory though. There's actually,
there's a lot of threads of it, you know,
there's um people who do more game theoretic approaches,
people who do other types of different sorts of
approaches. There's a lot of uh work in anthropology
on cultural evolutionary theory that's less modeling, more empirical.
Um It's a thoroughly interdisciplinary area. And so you
have all these kind of different paradigms or frameworks
for thinking about cultural evolution.
Yeah. I it in fact, integrates a lot of
different things. There are people that work uh with
everything from evolutionary psychology to anthropology, cultural evolution, human
ecology. Basically they apply all of those tools in
cultural evolutionary theory, right? Yeah, that's right. So uh
let me ask you about another topic regarding science
just before we move on to other subjects. So,
um there are scientific retraction sometimes uh when it
happens, does it usually work or not?
Uh So this is I I take it you're
asking this question because I have this paper on
scientific retraction. Um This is a topic that has
been really interesting to me because, you know, we
think of science as this kind of, you know,
we would want science to be an ideal community
of learners, right? And that's what science is trying
to be a group of people who are using
the best methods, the best practices available to learn
about the world and develop good beliefs about the
world. And like science is pretty successful in doing
that. But of course, there are, it's, it's all
it's people in the end. So it's not gonna
be perfect. So one thing that's been really widely
observed in people who do empirical studies of scientific
communities is that retractions often fail or aren't fully
successful. So maybe someone um uh is caught having
committed fraud and some of their papers are retracted
often if you look later at those papers, they're
being cited in the literature and they're not being
cited as retracted or fraudulent papers, they're just being
cited sort of straightforward by people who don't know
that they've actually been retracted. And so this happens
kind of again and again and again. Um AND
then related to that, I think you see similar
things happening outside of science just in broader societies.
So for example, during the COVID-19 pandemic, it happened
dozens of times that there would be some uh
scientific claim shared by journalists, you know, for example,
uh there was this very influential early study done
in Northern California that um claimed that the fatality
rate of COVID was much lower than it actually
is that study was really widely cited, uh turned
out they had, had an error in their initial
reprint that they quickly fixed, but their initial numbers
propagated pretty far. And I don't think the like
report of the error and the proper numbers propagated
nearly as far. Right. So people didn't get the
message that their initial numbers were wrong and in
fact, underestimated the fatality. Right. So that's another kind
of instance, they're both instances where you have these
scientific claims that have like viability legitimacy, they spread
in social networks when they are reversed or known
to be false. Not everyone finds out that they
would were false who initially found out about this
claim. So some co-author um Anders Guy and Travis
Laquan and I built models where we would have
a network and we would have something like a
false claim spreading in the network and then we'd
introduce a retraction and let that spread as well.
And we would ask, well, what are the situations
where people find out about the retraction? When do
they continue to hold the false belief, et cetera?
Um And we found that in a lot of
cases, people would just hold the false belief as
an accident of history. You know, you have these
things spreading from person to person. And so some
people just get the false thing and they never
hear about the true thing. It's just what happens
randomly, right? Because of chance. But we found some
things like would influence how often that happened. So
for example, we found that retractions or reversals that
are instigated by the original source are much more
successful. So if I'm hearing the network and I
say something false, it starts to spread. If I
say oops, that was false, that spreads to the
same people and they care about that. But if
some other person is like, no, they're wrong and
they're not sort of connected to the people finding
out about this false thing in the first place.
People don't care as much about this retraction, right?
So they're the right people who hold false beliefs
aren't finding out they're wrong. So that was one
thing. Another thing is that weirdly like very prominent
false beliefs were often more reversible because, you know,
imagine, um some study that turns out to be
wrong but nobody knows about it. Well, someone comes
and says this was wrong. Well, nobody cares. Right.
So there aren't that many people to spread the
retraction. Whereas a very prominent false belief, if someone
shows that it's wrong, there's a lot of people
to spread the retraction to spread that it was
wrong. So we found in our models that sometimes
uh some false belief being really widely held meant
that it was easier to reverse.
Mhm. And I mean, if that happens, um would
you have any suggestions as to how people should
deal with it? I mean, when the paper gets
retracted. If for some reason, there are some people
out there that never get to learn that it
was retracted and keep citing it in their own
papers. What would be perhaps good solutions to try
to deal with that?
If we're talking about within science, there are some
things that we recommend that um other people have
talked about too. So one thing is that authors
and journals aren't usually incentivized to talk about something
being retracted because who wants to say like I
was wrong or we published a paper where the
person committed fraud. Uh So especially with journals, a
lot of them are not very active about sharing
that something's been retracted. You know, they're not like
splashing it on their front page. Uh They're often
not even like making a very clear sort of
retraction statement on the page where it might be
linked. Sometimes you'll just see ones where it just
says retract in like a tiny little word. So
I think journals should be much more active about
communicating about retraction. Um Search engines like Google scholar
should be much better about making clear when things
are retracted. Like have a big note on the
top of a paper when you search it saying
that it's been retracted. Um As much as possible
individuals when they're being responsible should share when they
were wrong or when they cited something wrong. But
of course, it's hard to get people to do
that uh, the other thing I think would be
good is, you know, when academic journals publish a
paper, um, you know, there's a whole process of
like checking over that paper, if we have a
database of retracted articles, that would be a natural
time step to just compare all the citations in
the paper with things that have been retracted and
flag ones that might be false as well.
Mhm. So, changing topics now, I mean, I've already
had many discussions on the show with moral philosophers,
particularly moral philosophers about this, but also with uh
with uh some scientists is naturalism congruent with any
me ethics. I mean, if we, if we tackle
things from a naturalistic perspective, I mean, are we
committing ourselves necessarily to, for example, moral realism or
moral anti realism?
Um So I, like, you know, as a grad
student, I co wrote a paper on this with
like my advisor. It's not, it's not really my
area of study. Um I mean, I can tell
you what we said in that, which was something
like you can both have a meta ethics that's
thoroughly naturalistic, you know, things that like human brains
evolved the way they did for all of these
sort of practical and pragmatic reasons that evolution explains
why we have the moral beliefs and instincts we
have. So we wanna say you can hold that
true and at the same time be like, but
I have first order moral beliefs and I still
gonna argue for them with all the sort of
force that I did before. Like, I can believe
all that and still think, like, hurting people is
wrong. And so I can still argue about what
we ought to do and not do whether or
not I have a fully naturalistic picture of human
morality.
Mhm. Uh, OK. So another topic that you've, uh,
wrote a bit about is perceptual categories. So, do
we know if they have evolved to track properties
of the world or not?
Yeah. So this is something that, um, gets into
a lot of like really deep discussions and debate
in philosophy, philosophy of perception, but also in cognitive
science, I mean, obviously, so we have our perceptual
senses to mediate our behaviors in the world, right?
Where organisms, our goals, I mean, when I put
goals, our goals as shaped by evolution are to
like eat, drink sleep, keep our bodies alive, eventually
reproduce, right? Um, AND maybe keep our Children alive
so that they can reproduce. So we have bodies
that are trying to do those things. Perception is
useful in as much as it allows us to
do those things. Um, SO some people like Don
Hoffman have made arguments like, well, there's no reason
to think that our perception needs to accurately track
the world, then all it needs to do is
promote our fitness. And so it could be the
case that it promotes our fitness in ways that,
um, but by, you know, creating perceptual categories or
perceptual experiences that don't sort of glom onto the
stuff that's really there, the structures that really exist.
Uh Now I think that, and then, and he
says for that reason, we have no reason to
think that our sort of perception and our perceptual
experiences is anything like what the world is like
or tells us about what the world is like.
Um SO he uses models to do that. I
use similar models to make a different argument, which
is something like, uh, in fact, there's plenty of
reason to often think that the structure of the
world is really important in determining how our fitness
is going to look like. Um, THAT there's at
least going to be some reasons why our perception
needs to tell us veridical or world tracking things
in order for us to survive. And so making
the jump to, like, our perception has nothing to
do with the world seems like much too strong
of a jump to me for that reason.
Yeah, I, I've in fact already had, uh, Doctor
Hoffman twice on the show and the, yes, he,
he has at least some compelling arguments to support
his position. But, uh, I mean, since you come
from, uh, I'm not sure if you would label
it the opposite place or at, but at least
a different place. Uh, HOW do you look at
it exactly? Do you look at it through a
pragmatic lens, for example, since you're also coming at
it from an evolutionary perspective.
Yeah. So um I do think of perception through
this kind of pragmatic lens and like an evolutionary
lens where I assume, you know, there's some things,
some structures in the world, uh there are actions
that would be better or worse for organisms to
take in the presence of these different structures. So
for example, if humans are in the presence of
blackberries eating is a good action. If they're in
the presence of uh juniper berries eating is not
such a good action. Um So there are ways
in which the structure of the world impacts like
our fitness based on how we act. So I
use models that assume that and then, um I
ask in these models, well, what, what will our
perceptual categories look like? And there are certain kinds
of things that will often be the case. So
part of um Dawn's argument is that, for example,
uh you know, there might be things in the
world that are different from each other and we
should respond to them in the same way and
then we can categorize them together. So maybe something
like a lower level animal, say a dragon fly
can have the same perceptual experience for many different
types of food because all they need to do
in response to that food is eat. And so
their reception doesn't have to disambiguate those things um,
and he would say, well then their perception isn't
tracking the world. My response would be something like
there's ways in which it's not tracking the world
in ways in which it is, you know, it
is putting whatever all the, I don't know what
Dragonflies eat, all of that kind of little bug
into the same edible category. Right. And all of
this kind of bug are in the same category.
So it's tracking sameness among those different food sources.
It's failing to track difference between them. But that
doesn't mean there's no sort of important correspondence between
perception and the world. Mhm
So uh I would like to ask you now
about learning generalization and evolutionarily stable strategy. So, and
to compare them as models for learning basically. So
uh first of all, tell us what is learning
generalization.
Yeah. So this is a completely like ubiquitous, widespread
learning behavior where um so an organism encounters something
in the world, it learns something about it. So
maybe it learns like touching good eating good, avoiding
good, whatever it learns. Um But that learned response
is not just applied to that single state that
the organism encountered, but to many similar states. So
if I try eating a blackberry and it tastes
good, I don't learn to eat only that exact
blackberry with that exact weight, that exact color, that
exact smell, that exact location I learned to eat
blackberries in general. Um And that sounds like, well,
Yeah, obviously, duh. Right. Of course, you should do
that, but it's actually a nontrivial task, you know,
uh when you expand out from that first initial
stimuli, how many things do you include, like, how
dissimilar, how similar, what counts as something that you
ought to eat in response to this initial learning
experience? Um So that's what learning generalization is. Uh
Do you want me to talk about like why
it's interesting from the perspective of like, OK, so
there's this classic argument in evolutionary game theory. So
the study of the evolution of strategic behaviors uh
having to do with learning. So when you have
these strategic situations, there are certain kinds of behaviors
that are um are going to be the ones
you expect to evolve. Basically, the ones that can
be stable in an evolutionary scenario. And the argument
is something like this, you should only expect the
selection of learning that will learn those ideal strategies.
Because if you have a learner who doesn't learn
those ideal strategies, then they're gonna get a lower
payoff than the ones who do, then they should
be selected against. So expect organisms to learn these
stable strategies in these strategic scenarios. But, and you
know, I've done work arguing this other people have
as well. But the issue with that argument is
that there are tradeoffs and benefits in learning. So
learning doesn't happen all in one second. It takes
time and you're getting payoffs over the entire time
that that's happening. So learning generalization is a behavior
that doesn't lead to these ideal evolutionarily stable strategies.
These perfect strategies basically because it leads you to
extend learning to situations where you didn't uh experience
the um the first learning experience, right to new
situations. And so you extend your learning to situations
where it might not be quite as good as
the ones where you learned it. So I use
models to show that this is the case learning
generalization isn't going to fit with this kind of
classic argument about learning, but very clearly, it has
evolved. And the reason is that it helps you
learn faster. So imagine if you had to learn
the right behavior in response to every single blackberry
you ever saw individually. Well, you're not learning, you're
not really learning at all, but in any case,
you're learning very, very, very slowly. And so you're
gonna have all these times in your lifetime where
you could have extended a lesson to a useful
scenario, but you didn't. And so the idea is
that selection is going to account for that need
for speed, even if this kind of speedy learning
behavior necessarily stops you from learning kind of most
perfect precise thing you could.
Mhm But does that mean then that learning generalization
uh contradicts evolutionarily stable strategies as a model for
learning or does it implement in any way?
Well, so OK, so evolutionarily stable strategies, they are
um outcomes in a game that you expect to
evolve. So that's a little bit separate from learning.
It's not the case that in fact, they always
evolve even in evolutionary models, but that's a whole
separate thing. Um So they're the sort of behaviors
you expect to evolve. But you can also ask
what learning behaviors get selected for. And so the
argument is about, will you see learning behaviors that
always lead to those evolutionarily stable strategies or will
you see other learning behaviors? And you know, the
argument is you'll see other learning behaviors because they're
faster or have other kinds of benefits besides getting
to the perfect strategies?
Mhm So uh the last topic I would like
to get into today is misinformation during and about
the COVID-19 pandemic. So, uh first of all, what
do you think uh what were the questions that
you found more interesting uh about this topic from
coming from the perspective of the perspective of game
theory?
Um Well, so I thought so not just coming
from the perspective of game theory. So a lot
of my work on um misinformation that isn't in
game theory but in other kinds of modeling. Uh
But so there were a lot of things that
happened during the pandemic that were like really interesting
from the point of view of thinking about misinformation,
spread of beliefs, social spread of beliefs, all this
stuff. So here was one thing. Um So Jim
Weall and I published this book in 2019, the
misinformation Age where one of the things we argued
is that in cases where false beliefs really hurt
people, they should be less likely to hold those
false beliefs. So for example, if everyone is like,
oh Red Kool Aid is the most delicious. It's
even if that were somehow not true, uh It's
totally fine for me to conform with everyone and
drink Red Kool Aid or to trust everyone in
saying, say they said it was nutritious to trust
everyone and saying it was nutritious. It doesn't matter.
It's not gonna hurt me if I drink Red
Kool Aid, right? It's just not that bad for
me, even if this belief was a little wrong.
On the other hand, if everyone was like, oh
it's safest to drink cyanide, we shouldn't see that
false belief spreading, right? We shouldn't see everyone starting
to drink that because it really matters to people.
If they get it wrong. Now with COVID, I
would have thought before the pandemic that this would
be a scenario. That's more like the latter case
because you could make choices during the pandemic where
if you make that choice today, it directly leads
to your death in 24 days, right? You just
die in a couple weeks and in particular exposure,
choices could put people at risk of death just
very directly and there's a pretty high fatality rate
from COVID, but you still saw all of these
kinds of social effects on belief and misinformation related
to COVID. In spite of its very prominent, like
visible real world danger to people, you still saw
people choosing to be exposed based on partisan identity,
for example, um or choosing whether or not to
wear masks based on their social identities or whether
they were conforming with other people in their social
networks. Uh So I thought that that was very
interesting and surprised me quite a lot actually.
And, uh I mean, how do you make sense
of it then?
I mean, I guess the way I make sense
of it is thinking that like, you know, social
pressures are just stronger and more important to people
than maybe I initially would have thought. And they're
just, you know, a whole thesis of this book
was that like, social stuff matters to belief a
lot. And I feel like, oh, I, I guess
that was right, even more right than I expected,
you know, um, that people would be influenced by
these sort of social factors so much that they
would be willing to take fairly significant risks to
their home.
But, I mean, from the perspective, you've, you've used
to tackle this topic, uh do these beliefs that
are epistemic wrong, I guess, uh still serve uh
particular functions, namely social function functions. And is that
the main reason why they spread, even though they
might be harmful to people who believe them and
spread them
Yeah, that's right. They often can. So um this
is something that I haven't exactly model but, you
know, I've looked at other people's work on one
thing that beliefs do is play roles as far
as in group out group signaling, communicating your social
identity, bonding with other people, impressing other people. So
holding beliefs and sharing beliefs and taking actions based
on belief, it all has functions, you know, with
respect to like our bodies and their relation to
the world, but it also has functions with respect
to us and our social relationships. So for example,
I might put on a mega hat to signal
to the people. I want to signal to I'm
part of your in group and they will assume
in my wearing that hat that I also hold
various sorts of beliefs about the world and how
it works.
So do you think that if we uh get
a good understanding of how all of these works?
I mean, why people hold certain beliefs and why
they communicate them to other people that perhaps we
could, could use this knowledge to tackle misinformation?
I certainly think it can help. Um So for
example, understanding online platforms and how the spread of
belief works on online platforms, I think can help
those platforms develop better information environments or better algorithms
to protect people. So just to give a little
example, again, not my research, other people's research, but
um it seems like emotional language has a big
impact on how wide widely spread things like tweets
on Twitter are. Uh And so knowing that can
help a platform realize, OK, if you have emotional
language attached to say misinformation, um maybe that's the
sort of thing the algorithm shouldn't actively promote. And
so that's an example of knowing something about how
humans work, possibly helping to improve information spread in
a social group.
Mhm. Yeah. And perhaps, I guess that holding certain
very influential people accountable for what they say, like
for example, Donald Trump would also help a little
bit.
Yeah. Ok.
Yeah. Uh OK. So Doctor o'connor, uh just before
we go, would you like to tell people where
they can find you and your work on the
internet
there? I have a website. It's just my name
Kelly o'connor dot com. I put up all my
preprinted papers there. So any research that I've done
can be found there except my books. Um AND
I'm also on Twitter. It's Ken Meister is my
handle like my name and then Meist er my
dad used to call me the Ken Meister and
then when I became, you know, when I actually
got a master's degree, like I thought it would
be funny.
Yeah, it totally makes sense. Ok, so uh I'm
leaving links to that in the description box of
the interview and Doctor o'connor, thank you so much
again for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been really fun to talk to you.
Yeah, nice talking to you, Ricardo and hopefully we'll
catch each other around sometime.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please do not
forget to like it, share, comment and subscribe. And
if you like more generally, what I'm doing, please
consider support the show on Patreon or paypal. You
have all of the links in the description of
this interview. This show is brought to you by
En Lights learning and development. Done differently. Check their
website at alights.com. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters per Larson, Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunda
Bernards O of Election and Visor Adam Castle Matthew
Whit Whitting Bear, no wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric Alania,
John Connors Philip Forrest Connelly, Robert Winde Nai Z
Mark Nevs Colin Holbrook, Simon Columbus, Phil Kor Michael
Stormer, Samuel Andreev for the S Alexander Dan Bauer
Fergal Ken Hall, her og Michel Jonathan lebron Jars
and the Samuel K, Eric Heins Mark Smith Jan
We Amal S Franz David Sloan Wilson, Yasa, Des
Roma Roach Diego, Jannik Punter, Da Man Charlotte Bliss,
Nicole Barbar Wam and Pao Assy Naw Guy Madison,
Gary GH, some of the Adrian Yin Nick Golden
Paul talent in Ju Bar was Julian Price Edward
Hall, Eden Bronner, Douglas Fry Franca Bertolotti, Gabriel Pan
Cortez, Lelis Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith,
John Wiesman, Martin Aland, Daniel Friedman. William Buckner, Paul
George Arnold Luke Lo A Georges the often Chris
Williamson, Peter Oren, David Williams the Costa Anton Erickson
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw and Murray Martinez Chevalier, Bangalore
atheists, Larry Daley Junior Holt Eric B. Starry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Rough the RP MD,
Ior Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radix, Mark Campbell,
Richard Bowen Thomas, the Dubner, Luke Ni and Greece
story, Manuel Oliveira, Kimberly Johnson and Benjamin Gilbert. A
special thanks to my producers is our web gem
Frank Luca Stefi, Tom Weam Bernard ni Ortiz Dixon,
Benedict Mueller Vege, Gli Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Robert Lewis and Al Nick
Ortiz. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si
Adrian and Bogdan Kut. Thank you for all.